>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, APRIL 12:
HILLARY CLINTON MAKES IT
OFFICIAL.
SHE WILL SEEK THE PRESIDENCY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA FACES CRITICISM
AFTER HIS HISTORIC MEETING WITH
CUBAN LEADER RAUL CASTRO.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SAN FRANCISCO'S BOLD PLAN TO
ELIMINATE ALL NEW HIV
INFECTIONS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
HILLARY CLINTON MADE IT OFFICIAL
TODAY, SHE'S RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT.
SHE MADE THE ANNOUNCEMENT IN A
VIDEO POSTED ONLINE THIS
AFTERNOON.
IT FEATURED PEOPLE FROM
TRADITIONALLY DEMOCRAT-LEANING
GROUPS, INCLUDING HISPANICS,
AFRICAN AMERICANS, WOMEN, AND
GAYS, ALL TALKING ABOUT HOW
THEY'RE GETTING READY FOR THE
FUTURE.
>> I'M GETTING READY FOR
SOMETHING TOO.
I'M RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT.
AMERICANS HAVE FOUGHT THEIR WAY
BACK FROM TOUGH ECONOMIC TIMES
BUT THE DECK IS STILL STACKED IN
FAVOR OF THOSE AT THE TOP.
EVERYDAY AMERICANS NEED A
CHAMPION AND I WANT TO BE THAT
CHAMPION.
SO YOU CAN DO MORE THAN JUST GET
BY.
YOU CAN GET AHEAD AND STAY
AHEAD.
BECAUSE WHEN FAMILIES ARE
STRONG, AMERICA IS STRONG.
>> Sreenivasan: HOURS BEFORE HER
ANNOUNCEMENT, ONE OF THE
REPUBLICAN FRONT RUNNERS, FORMER
FLORIDA GOVERNOR JEB BUSH,
RELEASED HIS OWN VIDEO.
IN IT, HE TIED CLINTON TO WHAT
HE CALLED THE "FAILED POLICIES"
OF THE LAST SEVEN YEARS.
>> WE MUST TO DO BETTER THAN THE
OBAMA-CLINTON FOREIGN POLICY
THAT HAS DAMAGED RELATIONSHIPS
WITH OUR ALLIES AND EMBOLDENED
OUR ENEMIES.
BETTER THAN THEIR FAILED BIG-
GOVERNMENT POLICIES THAT GROW
OUR DEBT AND STAND IN THE WAY OF
REAL ECONOMIC GROWTH AND
PROSPERITY.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE MORE
IN A MOMENT.
PRESIDENT OBAMA RETURNED HOME
EARLY TODAY FOLLOWING THE SUMMIT
OF THE AMERICAS IN PANAMA, WHERE
HE HAD A HISTORIC MEETING WITH
CUBAN LEADER RAUL CASTRO.
APPEARING ON THE SUNDAY MORNING
TALKS SHOWS, SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY SAID THE DECADES-OLD
AMERICAN EMBARGO AGAINST CUBA
HAD FAILED TO PROMPT REFORMS IN
THAT COUNTRY.
HE PREDICTED ENGAGEMENT WOULD
LEAD TO CHANGE THERE.
>> THE BELIEF IS VERY POWERFUL
THAT BY BEGINNING TO ENGAGE, BY
BEGINNING TO HAVE GREATER
TRAVEL, GREATER ABILITY TO MOVE,
GREATER ABILITY TO VISIT, IDEAS
AND OPPORTUNITIES WILL GROW THAT
THE CUBAN PEOPLE THEMSELVES WILL
HAVE A GREATER OPPORTUNITY FOR
EXPRESSION AND FOR EXCHANGE OF
VIEWS.
AND THAT IS WHAT WILL PROMOTE A
TRANSFORMATION OVER A PERIOD OF
TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT NEW JERSEY
DEMOCRATIC SENATOR ROBERT
MENENDEZ, A CUBAN-AMERICAN,
CRITICIZED THE GET-TOGETHER
SAYING THE CUBAN REGIME
CONTINUES TO ARREST HUNDREDS OF
POLITICAL DISSIDENTS.
>> I THINK THE PRESIDENT HAS A
MISGUIDED CALCULATION THAT IF
YOU OPEN YOUR HANDS TO DICTATORS
THEY WILL UNCLENCH THEIR FISTS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ISLAMIC
EXTREMIST GROUP KNOWN AS ISIS
HAS POSTED VIDEO SHOWING WHAT IT
CLAIMS ARE ITS FIGHTERS
DESTROYING YET ANOTHER ANCIENT
SITE IN IRAQ.
THE VIDEO SHOWS ISIS MEMBERS
ENTERING BUILDINGS IN THE
ANCIENT CITY OF NIMRUD, USING
SLEDGEHAMMERS AND SAWS TO
DESTROY ASSYRIAN ARTIFACTS.
THE CITY WAS FOUNDED MORE THAN
3,000 YEARS AGO, IN THE 13TH
CENTURY B.C.
(EXPLOSION)
ISIS HAS DESTROYED SEVERAL
ANCIENT HISTORICAL SITES,
ATTACKING WHAT IT CLAIMS ARE
DEPICTIONS OF "FALSE IDOLS"
POPE FRANCIS HAS MADE SEVERAL
RECENT COMMENTS DENOUNCING
ISIS'S ATTACKS ON CHRISTIANITY.
AND TODAY, IN COMMENTS THAT
COULD AFFECT VATICAN RELATIONS
WITH THE WIDER MUSLIM WORLD, THE
POPE SAID THE MASSACRE OF
ARMENIANS 100 YEARS AGO AMOUNTED
TO GENOCIDE.
>> (translated): IT IS
NECESSARY, AND INDEED A DUTY, TO
HONOR THEIR MEMORY, FOR WHENEVER
MEMORY FADES, IT MEANS THAT EVIL
ALLOWS WOUNDS TO FESTER.
>> Sreenivasan: AS MANY AS A
MILLION AND A HALF ARMENIANS
WERE KILLED DURING WORLD WAR ONE
IN WHAT IS NOW TURKEY.
TURKEY TODAY CONDEMNED THE
POPE'S REMARKS, CALLING THEM
"FAR FROM HISTORICAL REALITY."
A WASHINGTON POST REPORTER,
JASON REZAIAN, WHO HAS BEEN
DETAINED IN IRAN FOR MORE THAN
EIGHT MONTHS, IS NOW FACING
CHARGES OF ESPIONAGE AND ACTING
AGAINST NATIONAL SECURITY AND
WILL BE TRIED IN IRAN'S
REVOLUTIONARY COURT.
THIS FROM THE SEMI-OFFICIAL FARS
NEWS AGENCY.
THE FARS REPORT SAYS REZAIAN
OBTAINED ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL
INFORMATION FROM IRAN AND SOLD
IT TO UNNAMED AMERICANS.
REZAIAN HOLDS DUAL AMERICAN AND
IRANIAN CITIZENSHIP.
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT HAS CALLED
FOR HIS RELEASE.
THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA IS
PREPARING TO STOP WELFARE
BENEFITS TO FAMILIES THAT DO NOT
VACCINATE THEIR CHILDREN.
PRIME MINISTER TONY ABBOTT SAYS
HIS SO-CALLED "NO JAB, NO PAY"
PLAN IS MEANT TO PROTECT PUBLIC
HEALTH.
ITS ESTIMATED THAT 39,000
CHILDREN IN THAT COUNTRY OF
NEARLY 23 MILLION ARE
UNVACCINATED.
PARENTS CAN CURRENTLY CLAIM
MEDICAL OR RELIGIOUS EXEMPTIONS.
AND AMAZON HAS FILED SUIT IN AN
EFFORT TO BLOCK FAKE REVIEWS ON
ITS WEBSITE.
AMAZON SAYS THE COMPANIES IT'S
GOING AFTER ARE FABRICATING AS
MANY FIVE-STAR REVIEWS AS THEIR
CUSTOMERS ARE WILLING TO PAY
FOR.
AMAZON SAYS THE BOGUS REVIEWS
ARE BEING QUOTE "SLOW DRIPPED"
ONTO ITS WEBSITE TO MAKE THEM
MORE DIFFICULT TO DETECT.
FOR MORE ABOUT HILLARY CLINTON'S
RUN FOR THE PRESIDENCY, WE ARE
JOINED NOW FROM WASHINGTON BY
ONE OF THE NATION'S TOP
POLITICAL REPORTERS.
DAN BALZ, THE CHIEF
CORRESPONDENT OF THE WASHINGTON
POST.
SO WHAT IS THE VISION THAT
HILLARY CLINTON WANTS TO LAY
OUT?
>> BASED ON EVERYTHING WE
KNOW ABOUT HILLARY CLINTON'S
LIFE AND LIFE STORY, SHE'S
GOING TO TALK A LOT ABOUT
MIDDLE CLASS, MIDDLE CLASS
INCOME SECURITY, ECONOMIC
MOBILITY, INCOME INEQUALITY
BUT NOT IN A HARD-EDGED WAY.
WE KNOW THAT THAT WAS THE
FOCUS CERTAINLY OF THE EIGHT
CLINTON YEARS WHEN HER
HUSBAND WAS PRESIDENT.
EVERYTHING SHE SAID IN THE
RUN-UP OVER THE LAST 18
MONTHS AS SHE HAS GOTTEN
READY TO BECOME A FORMAL
CANDIDATE POINTS IN THAT
DIRECTION.
SO I THINK THAT'S PART OF
IT.
AND I THINK THE SECRETARY IS
SHE HAS ALWAYS HAD A MORE
MUSCULAR FOREIGN POLICY THAN
SOME OTHERS IN THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
I THINK THAT IS ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS GIVEN ALL OF THE
TURMOIL IN THE MIDDLE EAST
AND ELSEWHERE, HOW SHE WILL
ADDRESS THAT.
>> IS THERE A DIFFERENCE NOW,
I GUESS EIGHT YEARS LATER
THAN THE HILL RAE THAT WAS
RUNNING AGAINST BARACK OBAMA
AND PERHAPS A DIFFERENT
STRATEGY WHERE AT THAT TIME
MAYBE SHE HAD DIFFERENT
GOALS IN MIND OF
ESTABLISHING HER CREDIBILITY
VERSUS NOW, SHE'S KIND OF
GOT THAT.
SHE WAS HIS SECRETARY OF
STATE.
>> WHEN SHE RAN EIGHT YEARS
AGO, ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
ONE OF HER ADVISORS
SUGGESTED WAS SHE NEEDED TO
PROJECT KIND OF A MARGARET
THATCHER IMAGE.
YOU KNOW, THE IRON LADY
IMAGE FROM THATCHER'S DAYS
AS PRIME MINISTER IN
BRITAIN.
I DON'T THINK SHE'S IN THAT
POSITION TODAY.
SHE HAS BEEN SECRETARY OF
STATE, AS YOU SAY.
AND I THINK THAT AT THIS
POINT, EVERYTHING SUGGESTS
THAT WHAT SHE NEEDS TO DO OR
WANTS TO DO IS PROJECTED
DIFFERENT KIND OF
PERSONALITY AND PERSONA ON
THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL.
WARMER, FRIENDLIER,
MORE-- CLOSER TO THE GROUND.
HER FIRST TRIP TO IOWA WHICH
WILL TAKE PLACE IN A COUPLE
OF DAYS IS LIKELY TO FEATURE
ALMOST ENTIRELY SMALL EVENTS,
INTIMATE GATHERINGS, NOT BIG
RALLIES, NO PRESUMPTIVENESS
ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL THAT
THIS IS NOT A KIND OF A
PRIVILEGED MARCH THROUGH A
CORONATION.
BUT SOMETHING IN WHICH SHE'S
GOING TO GET HER HANDS DIRTY
TRYING TO CONNECT WITH
VOTERS.
>> AND IOWA WAS ONE OF THE
PLACES SHE DIDN'T
NECESSARILY CONNECT WITH THE
VOTERS LAST TIME.
>> NO, ABSOLUTELY.
I HAVE BEEN IN AND OUT OF
IOWA A HALF A DOZEN TIMES
OVER THE LAST YEAR AND
TALKED TO PEOPLE INCLUDING
DEMOCRATIC ACTIVISTS.
AND THEY REMEMBER THAT
CAMPAIGN WITH VERY MIXED
VIEWS.
THE SENSE THAT BOTH
SECRETARY CLINTON AND IN
FACT A LOT OF THE SENIOR
STAFF FROM THE NATIONAL
CAMPAIGN AROUND HER DIDN'T
PAY PROPER ATTENTION, DID
NOT CAMPAIGN IN THE WAY
IOWANS LIKE.
IOWANS EXPECT A LOT OF
HANDS-ON CAMPAIGNING AND
SHE DIDN'T DO THAT VERY
WELL.
SHE DID TO THE LIKE THE
CAUCUS PROCESS WHICH IS A
BIT OF AN ARCANE PROCESS.
SHE CAME AWAY WITH THAT WITH
A BAD TASTE IN HER MOUTH.
I THINK SHE WANTS TO ERASE A
LOT OF THOSE FEELINGS THAT
SHE HAS A DISDAIN FOR IOWA
OR IOWANS ARE THE IOWA
PROCESS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THIS
DOESN'T HAPPEN IN A VACUUM.
TOMORROW WE'RE EXPECTING
MARCO RUBIO TO ANNOUNCE HIS
INTENTION FOR THE CANDIDACY.
SHE HAS ALREADY BEEN GETTING
CRITIQUES FROM REPUBLICANS
AND CONSERVATIVES BEFORE SHE
EVEN LAUNCHES.
AND AT THE SAME TIME SHE'S
ALSO TAKING A LITTLE BIT OF
HEAT OR LACK OF SUPPORT FROM
PROGRESSIVES WHO THINK,
PERHAPS, SHE'S NOT LEFT
ENOUGH.
>> I THINK IT WILL BE VERY
DIFFICULT FOR HER EVER TO
QUITE SATISFY THE
PROGRESSIVES IN THE PARTY.
SHE'S PROBABLY NOT GOING TO
GO AS FAR AS THEY WOULD
LIKE.
SHE WILL TIP SOMEWHERE IN
THEIR DIRECTION.
I THINK SHE IS SOMEWHAT TO
THE LEFT OF HER HUSBAND IN
THEIR VIEWS ON ECONOMIC
POLICY ISSUES.
BUT SHE WILL ALSO VERY MUCH
BE THE TARGET AS YOU SUGGEST
OF ALL THE REPUBLICAN
CANDIDATES.
THEY WILL TIE HER TO THE
CRITICISMS THEY'VE BEEN
MAKING ALREADY OF PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S FOREIGN POLICY.
THEY WILL TALK ABOUT THINGS
SHE HAS OR HASN'T DONE AS
SECRETARY OF STATE.
THEY WILL TRY TO HOLD THAT
RECORD UP TO GREAT SCRUTINY.
SHE'S GOING TO GET A TON OF
CRITICISM.
SHE STANDS VERY, YOU KNOW,
SIGNIFICANTLY IN THE
POLITICAL LANDSCAPE AS IN
MAY BE WAYS A DOMINANT
FIGURE.
AND SHE WILL DRAW ATTACKS
FROM ALL SIDES AND WITHIN
HER OWN PARTY, SHE WON'T BE
ABLE TO SATISFY EVERYBODY.
AND AMONG THE REPUBLICANS,
THEY WILL TEE OFF ON HER AS
THEY'VE ALREADY INDICATED
THEY'RE PLANNING TO DO.
>> DAN BALZ OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST", THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: THE OUTBREAK OF
H.I.V. INFECTIONS IN SOUTHERN
INDIANA CONTINUES TO ESCALATE.
UP ABOUT 30% IN THE PAST TWO
WEEKS.
106 CASES HAVE NOW BEEN REPORTED
THERE.
THE VIRUS IS BELIEVED TO HAVE
BEEN TRANSMITTED THROUGH NEEDLES
SHARED AMONG INTRAVENOUS DRUG
USERS.
LAST WEEK WE TOLD YOU BRIEFLY OF
INDIANA'S PLANS TO SLOW THE
TRANSMISSION BY OPENING NEEDLE
EXCHANGES, BUT SAN FRANCISCO, A
CITY THAT LOST THOUSANDS TO AN
H.I.V. EPIDEMIC IN THE 80'S HAS
A MORE AMBITIOUS GOAL, TO END
ALL NEW H.I.V. INFECTIONS.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN CARLOS FREY REPORTS.
>> Reporter: AT WARD 86, A
BUSTLING OUTPATIENT H.I.V.
CLINIC AT SAN FRANCISCO GENERAL
HOSPITAL, NURSE DIANE JONES
DROPS EVERYTHING WHEN THIS PAGER
GOES OFF.
IT MEANS THAT SOMEONE IN THE
CITY JUST TESTED H.I.V.-
POSITIVE.
>> SO, I'M GOING TO MAKE HIM AN
APPOINTMENT.
JONES IS FOLLOWING A PROTOCOL
CALLED "RAPID" WHICH IS DESIGNED
TO GET NEW H.I.V.-POSITIVE
INDIVIDUALS INTO TREATMENT
IMMEDIATELY.
>> JUST GOT DIAGNOSED TODAY,
LAST NEGATIVE WAS JUNE.
>> Sreenivasan: JONES SCRAMBLES
TO MAKE PLANS FOR THE NEW
PATIENT WHO IS SEEN JUST HOURS
LATER.
IT'S PART OF AN AMBITIOUS PLAN
IN SAN FRANCISCO TO COMPLETELY
END NEW H.I.V. INFECTIONS.
EACH YEAR ABOUT 50,000 PEOPLE IN
THE UNITED STATES ARE INFECTED
WITH H.I.V. AND WHILE THE
DISEASE HAS MOVED OFF THE FRONT
PAGES AS TREATMENT HAS MADE
INFECTION MORE OF A MANAGEABLE
CHRONIC CONDITION, AN ESTIMATED
13,700 PEOPLE STILL DIE FROM
AIDS IN THE U.S. EACH YEAR.
GLOBALLY, AN ESTIMATED 1.5
MILLION PEOPLE ARE KILLED. IT'S
THE SIXTH LEADING CAUSE OF
DEATH.
IN SAN FRANCISCO THERE ARE
RELATIVELY FEW NEW H.I.V.
INFECTIONS, 359 IN 2013 AND
OVERWHELMINGLY FOUND IN GAY MEN.
IT'S A NUMBER THAT HAS BEEN
FALLING OVER THE PAST EIGHT
YEARS.
BUT NEW INFECTIONS HAVEN'T GONE
AWAY.
TODAY, PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICIALS,
DOCTORS, AND ACTIVISTS ARE
INCREASING THEIR EFFORTS TO
BRING THAT NUMBER ALL THE WAY
DOWN TO ZERO.
>> WE ARE TALKING ABOUT ENDING
THE H.I.V. EPIDEMIC.
>> Reporter: DR. DIANE HAVLIR IS
CHIEF OF THE H.I.V./AIDS
DIVISION AT SAN FRANCISCO
GENERAL HOSPITAL AND A FOUNDER
OF THE CITY'S "GETTING TO ZERO"
CONSORTIUM.
>> H.I.V. IS ONE OF THE WORST
EPIDEMICS OF ITS TIME.
IT'S TAKEN A HUGE TOLL ON OUR
CITY, A HUGE TOLL ALL AROUND THE
WORLD.
WE KNOW HOW TO PREVENT THIS
DISEASE, WE KNOW HOW TO TREAT
THIS DISEASE.
SO WHY WOULD WE NOT WANT TO
PREVENT EVERY SINGLE INFECTION,
AND PREVENT EVERY SINGLE DEATH?
>> Reporter: IN SAN FRANCISCO,
WHICH HAS SPENT $400 MILLION
DOLLARS FIGHTING H.I.V. OVER THE
LAST DECADE, THIS PLAN CALLS FOR
CONTROVERSIAL NEW DRUGS AS WELL
AS ESTABLISHED PREVENTION
STRATEGIES.
BUT IT STARTS WITH IMMEDIATE
TREATMENT FOR NEW H.I.V.
INFECTIONS.
>> IT DID, OKAY.
>> Reporter: ONE OF DR. HAVLIR'S
PATIENTS, JOSE, WHO IS OPENLY
GAY BUT ASKED THAT WE CONCEAL
HIS IDENTITY BECAUSE HIS FAMILY
DOESN'T KNOW ABOUT HIS HEALTH
ISSUE, WENT THROUGH THE "RAPID"
PROTOCOL WHEN HE WAS DIAGNOSED
WITH H.I.V. ALMOST A YEAR AGO.
>> SAY AHHHH.
>> Reporter: WITHIN 24 HOURS OF
BEING DIAGNOSED JOSE WAS HERE AT
WARD 86, AND DAYS LATER
RECEIVING H.I.V. MEDICATION.
>> I WAS ON MEDICATION ON THE
THIRD DAY.
AND UNDETECTABLE WITHIN LESS
THAN 30 DAYS.
>> Reporter: UNDETECTABLE,
MEANING HIS H.I.V. VIRAL LOAD
HAD BEEN REDUCED BY MEDICATION
TO THE POINT WHERE IT COULDN'T
BE DETECTED.
AND THE FASTER A NEW PATIENT IS
UNDETECTABLE, THE FASTER HE
REDUCES HIS CHANCE OF
TRANSMITTING THE VIRUS TO
OTHERS.
IN SAN FRANCISCO, ABOUT TWO-
THIRDS OF H.I.V. POSITIVE
INDIVIDUALS ARE VIRALLY
SUPPRESSED, LIKE JOSE, MORE THAN
DOUBLE THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
BUT THAT REQUIRES AN ENORMOUS
EFFORT.
>> THEY MIGHT END UP IN THE
HOSPITAL, THAT'S WHEN WE'RE
GOING TO MEET THEM AGAIN.
>> Reporter: WE FOLLOWED SOCIAL
WORKER SANDRA TORRES ON THE BUS
AS SHE CHECKED UP ON A FEW
PATIENTS WHO NEEDED EXTRA HELP
KEEPING UP WITH THEIR
APPOINTMENTS.
SHE AND OTHER SOCIAL WORKERS ARE
CONTINUALLY TRACKING PEOPLE
DOWN.
>> WE'RE GOING TO KNOCK ON THE
DOOR.
>> Reporter: IN THE GRITTY
TENDERLOIN DISTRICT WE WENT TO A
SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY HOTEL
WHERE AN H.I.V. POSITIVE PATIENT
WAS STAYING. HE'S AN INTRAVENOUS
DRUG USER AND NOT TAKING
MEDICATION.
>> HI HONEY, HOW YOU DOING?
>> Reporter: TORRES DROPPED OFF
AN APPOINTMENT REMINDER AND I
ASKED HER ABOUT THE PATIENT
AFTERWARD.
IT SEEMS LIKE AN ENORMOUS EFFORT
FOR ONE PERSON.
>> THAT'S WHAT IT'S GONNA TAKE,
THOUGH.
THAT IS ABSOLUTELY WHAT IT'S
GONNA TAKE.
>> Reporter: BUT IN SAN
FRANCISCO, GETTING TO ZERO IS
ALSO BANKING ON THE EXPANDED USE
OF A NEW TOOL: A DRUG THAT
PROTECTS INDIVIDUALS FROM
BECOMING INFECTED WITH H.I.V.
IT'S CALLED TRUVADA.
>> IF YOU TAKE THE PILL ONCE A
DAY, AND YOU TAKE IT
CONSISTENTLY, YOU WILL REDUCE
YOUR RISK OF H.I.V. INFECTION
BY AT LEAST 90%, AND PERHAPS AS
HIGH AS 99%.
>> Reporter: SCOTT WIENER IS AN
ELECTED CITY SUPERVISOR AND A
MEMBER OF THE "GETTING TO ZERO"
CONSORTIUM.
>> IT JUST MAKES SENSE FOR
PEOPLE TO CONSIDER THIS
ADDITIONAL PREVENTION TOOL.
IT MADE SENSE FOR ME.
AND I'M GLAD THAT I'M ON IT.
>> Reporter: WIENER, WHO
REPRESENTS THE LARGELY GAY
CASTRO DISTRICT AND WHO IS GAY
HIMSELF, WENT PUBLIC ABOUT HIS
OWN USE OF THE DRUG REGIMEN LAST
FALL AND MAKES TAKING THE ONCE-
A-DAY-PILL PART OF HIS ROUTINE
EACH MORNING.
>> MY DECISION TO DISCLOSE IS
REALLY TO RAISE AWARENESS, SO
MORE PEOPLE KNOW ABOUT IT AND
LOOK INTO IT, TO TRY TO INCREASE
ACCESS AND PROVIDE MOMENTUM FOR
BETTER ACCESS AND TO TRY TO
REDUCE STIGMA.
SO WHATEVER STEREOTYPES PEOPLE
HAVE, MAYBE WE CAN HELP BREAK
THOSE STEREOTYPES.
>> Reporter: INCLUDING THE
STEREOTYPES RAISED BY SOME
CRITICS THAT TAKING A PILL THAT
PREVENTS H.I.V. INFECTION WOULD
LEAD TO MORE PROMISCUOUS
BEHAVIOR.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A DRUG THAT
IN SOME CIRCLES HAS A STIGMA OF
OPENING THE DOOR TO A FREE-
WHEELING SEX SOCIETY.
H.I.V.'S NO LONGER A THREAT AND
WE DON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT
UNPROTECTED SEX.
DO YOU GET ANY OF THAT BACKLASH?
>> THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE WHO
HAVE THAT VIEW.
AND IT'S REALLY THE SAME
ARGUMENT AS WHEN PEOPLE WOULD
ARGUE IF YOU GIVE WOMEN ACCESS
TO THE BIRTH CONTROL PILL,
YOU'RE JUST GONNA ENCOURAGE THEM
TO BE PROMISCUOUS.
OR IF YOU VACCINATE YOUNG GIRLS
AGAINST H.P.V. YOU'RE GONNA TURN
THEM INTO, I THINK ONE PERSON
SAID, "YOU'LL TURN THEM INTO
NYMPHOMANIACS."
OR IF YOU GIVE SEX ED TO HIGH-
SCHOOL STUDENTS OR MIDDLE-SCHOOL
STUDENTS YOU'RE GONNA ENCOURAGE
THEM TO BE PROMISCUOUS.
THESE ARE COMPLETELY SPECIOUS
ARGUMENTS.
THIS IS ABOUT GIVING PEOPLE
EVERY TOOL AVAILABLE TO PROTECT
THEIR SEXUAL HEALTH.
>> REPORTER: THE USE OF TRUVADA
FOR H.I.V. PREVENTION WAS
APPROVED BY THE FDA IN JULY
2012.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
ISSUED GUIDELINES IN MAY OF LAST
YEAR RECOMMENDING THE DRUG FOR
THOSE WITH SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF
HIV INFECTION.
IN SAN FRANCISCO, RESEARCHERS
BELIEVE THAT WIDER ADOPTION OF
THE DRUG COULD DRAMATICALLY
REDUCE NEW H.I.V. INFECTIONS,
BUT SO FAR ONLY A FEW THOUSAND
SAN FRANCISCANS HAVE TAKEN THE
DRUG IN THE LAST YEAR.
SO WHY ISN'T THE USE OF THIS
DRUG MORE WIDESPREAD?
THERE ARE SOME SIDE EFFECTS, AS
WELL AS SPECULATION THAT DOCTORS
MAY BE HESITANT TO PRESCRIBE A
PREVENTATIVE DRUG TO HEALTHY
PATIENTS, AND THEN THERE'S THE
PRICE.
ALTHOUGH COVERED BY MOST
INSURANCE, TRUVADA, IS LISTED AT
MORE THAN $1000 A MONTH
EVEN SO, IT'S NOT NEARLY THE
SOLUTION THAT ITS PROPONENTS
MAKE IT OUT TO BE, ACCORDING TO
MICHAEL WEINSTEIN, PRESIDENT OF
THE AIDS HEALTHCARE FOUNDATION,
ONE OF THE LARGEST AIDS
ORGANIZATIONS IN THE WORLD.
>> I THINK THE EVIDENCE SHOWS
THAT IT IS NOT A GOOD PUBLIC
HEALTH STRATEGY.
>> Reporter: WHY IS THAT?
>> WELL, BECAUSE PEOPLE DON'T
ADHERE.
>> Reporter: WHILE STUDIES HAVE
SHOWN THAT THE REGIMEN CAN BE
OVER 90% EFFECTIVE WHEN TAKEN
EVERYDAY, WEINSTEIN POINTS OUT
THAT THE EFFICACY DROPS OFF WHEN
PEOPLE MISS THEIR DAILY DOSE.
HE ALSO SAYS THAT RELYING ON A
PILL INSTEAD OF A CONDOM MAY
LEAD TO A RISE IN OTHER SEXUALLY
TRANSMITTED DISEASES.
>> THE MOTIVATION THAT PEOPLE
HAVE FOR TAKING TRUVADA IS TO BE
ABLE TO HAVE SEX WITHOUT A
CONDOM.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK THAT
PEOPLE DON'T WANT TO WEAR
CONDOMS EITHER?
>> I THINK MEN IN GENERAL DON'T
WANNA WEAR CONDOMS.
THAT'S JUST AN ABSOLUTE TRUTH.
I MEAN, AND IT'S NOT SURPRISING.
BUT, YOU KNOW, WE DON'T WEAR
SEATBELTS EITHER, YOU KNOW, OR
HELMETS OR A LOT OF OTHER
THINGS.
BUT THEY'RE A NECESSITY.
>> Reporter: SO WOULDN'T IT BE
BETTER THEN, TO JUST TAKE A PILL
EVERY DAY INSTEAD OF WORRYING
ABOUT TRANSMITTING H.I.V.?
>> YOU KNOW WHAT?
IF IT WAS GUARANTEED THAT
EVERYBODY WOULD TAKE IT EVERY
DAY AS PRESCRIBED.
OBVIOUSLY OUR ATTITUDE ABOUT IT
WOULD BE COMPLETELY DIFFERENT IF
WE DIDN'T HAVE TO RELY ON THE
PERSON TO TAKE THAT PILL EVERY
SINGLE DAY.
>> Reporter: SAN FRANCISCO
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
CHIEF BARBARA GARCIA SAYS THE
CITY IS WORKING TO MAKE SURE THE
DRUG IS TAKEN AS PRESCRIBED, AND
THAT DOESN'T LEAD TO OTHER SAFE
SEX PRACTICES BEING ABANDONED.
>> WE HAVE ALREADY STARTED IN
TRYING TO EDUCATE YOUNG PEOPLE,
PARTICULARLY ABOUT THIS.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE CHALLENGES
OF HAVING EVEN IF WE HAD A CURE,
THAT WOULD BE THE SAME CHALLENGE
WE WOULD HAVE.
>> Reporter: DO YOU SEE THAT
HAPPENING THOUGH?
I MEAN, OBVIOUSLY, IF YOU'RE
HAVING UNSAFE SEX, YOU'RE GOING
TO BE TRANSMITTING OTHER
SEXUALLY-TRANSMITTED DISEASES
HERE
>> AND, IN FACT, WE'VE SEEN A
LITTLE BIT OF A RISE IN S.T.D.
HERE IN SAN FRANCISCO.
AND WE'RE ADDRESSING THAT AS
WELL.
>> Reporter: IT'S NOT CLEAR THAT
AN INCREASE IN STDS IS RELATED
TO AN INCREASE IN THE USE OF
TRUVADA.
AND GARCIA IS COMMITTED TO THE
DRUG REGIMEN BEING A PART OF
"GETTING TO ZERO" IN SAN
FRANCISCO.
AND BELIEVES THAT THE CITY'S
APPROACH TO ENDING HIV,
INCLUDING THE LIVES AND MONEY IT
WILL SAVE, WILL EVENTUALLY TRUMP
ANY CONTROVERSY.
>> Reporter: YOU CAN PROVE TO
THEM THAT YOU CAN SAVE MONEY BY
YOUR MODEL?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AN H.I.V. PREVENTION VERSUS AN
H.I.V. POSITIVE CLIENT IN CARE,
YES, WE CAN.
>> Reporter: SAN FRANCISCO HAS
MADE TREMENDOUS ADVANCES IN
BATTLING AN EPIDEMIC THAT HIS
THIS CITY HARDER THAN MOST.
AND ACCORDING TO DR. HAVLIR
ACTUALLY GETTING TO ZERO IS
WITHIN REACH.
>> I THINK WE WOULD ALL
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT IT IS GOING TO
BE DIFFICULT TO DO, BUT I THINK
IF, AS WE SAY, IF ANYBODY CAN DO
IT, WE THINK THAT WE CAN SHOW
PEOPLE HOW IT CAN BE DONE
STARTING HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
TRUVADA, THE CONTROVERSIAL PILL
THAT'S A MAJOR PART OF SAN
FRANCISCO'S PLAN TO WIPE OUT
H.I.V., VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
CHINA'S OFFICIAL GROWTH RATE IS
ONE OF THOSE STATISTICS THAT
PEOPLE AROUND THE WORLD PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION TO.
AFTER ALL, IT'S THE SECOND
LARGEST ECONOMY IN THE WORLD.
BUT SOME QUESTION THE NUMBERS.
AND BLOOMBERG REPORTER KEN
HOFFMAN, WHO JUST RETURNED FROM
CHINA, SAYS HE HAS PLENTY OF
ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE THAT THE
ECONOMY THERE IS IN GREATER
TROUBLE THAN CAN BE SEEN BY THE
NUMBERS.
HE JOINS US NOW.
SO YOU FOCUS ON METALS, MINING.
WHEN YOU WENT THROUGH THE
COUNTRYSIDE, WHAT DID YOU SEE?
>> SO THE NEW GOVERNMENT
CAME IN ABOUT FOUR YEARS
AGO.
ABOUT TWO YEARS AGO THEY HAD
A MEETING CALLED THE THIRD
PLENUM WHERE THEY DECIDE THE
COUNTRY'S FUTURE OVER THE
NEXT TEN YEARS.
WHAT PEOPLE WERE TELL ME IS
THIS IS A COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT CHINA.
THEY ARE REALLY GOING TO
CHANGE EVERYTHING ABOUT WHAT
CHINA DOES.
AND THIS WAS THE FIRST TIME
I WITNESSED THAT CHANGE,
WHICH IS INSTEAD OF, YOU
KNOW, CHINA CONSUMES ABOUT
HALF OF THE WORLD'S METAL
AND MINING, CEMENT, I THINK
IT'S EVERY 12 DAYS THEY
CONSUME AN ENTIRE YEAR'S WORTH
OF U.S. CEMENT DEMAND.
NOW YOU ARE SEEING THE COUNTRY
SAYING ENOUGH IS ENOUGH.
YOU HAVE HEARD THE UNDER THE
DOME DOCUMENTARY ABOUT
POLLUTION.
AND THEY'RE REALLY LEANING
TOWARD SORT OF UPGRADING THE
ECONOMY WITH-- AND IT'S
GOING TO HAVE BIG
IMPLICATIONS TO THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: SO YOU SAW
WHAT, BASICALLY THAT THE
THRUST ON MANUFACTURING HAS
SLOWED?
>> FIRST OF ALL THE THRUST
ON REAL ESTATE HAS SLOWED.
ONE OF THE THINGS PEOPLE
SAID WAS THE LOCALITIES
REALLY WERE PUSHING THIS BIG
GROWTH ENGINE.
THE LOCALITY, IF YOU PUT ALL
THE PLANING TO, PLAN TO
BUILD HOMES FOR 3.4 BILLION
PEOPLE, THEY ONLY HAVE 1.2
BILLION PEOPLE SO, THERE WAS
MASSIVE OVERGROWTH.
AND WHAT I SAW WAS A LOT OF
EMPTY BUILDINGS, A LOT OF
TAXI DRIVERS SORT OF SAYING
THROUGH AN INTERPRETER, HEY,
MY AUNT LOST MONEY IN THIS
OR MY UNCLE LOST MONEY IN
THAT PLACE.
IT'S ALL SORT OF JUST
STOPPED.
>> Sreenivasan: SO GIVEN ALL
THIS, WHY DO YOU SEE SUCH A
BURST OF ENERGY IN THE
CHINESE STOCK MARKET.
>> THAT MAKES ALL THE SENSE.
BECAUSE OF INSTEAD OF
INVESTING IN REAL ESTATE,
THE CHINESE PEOPLE HAVE
TURNED ALL THEIR INCOME TO
THE STOCK MARKET.
YOU HAVE SEEN AN INCREDIBLE
AMOUNT OF MONEY LEAVE THE
REAL ESTATE INDUSTRY AND GO
INTO THE STOCK MARKET AND
THE STOCK MARKET HAS DOUBLED
OVER THE LAST YEAR OR SO.
>> WHAT ARE THE RIPPLE
AFFECTS IF THE CHINESE
ECONOMY SLOWS SIGNIFICANTLY
MORE THAN WHAT WE ARE
PREDICTS OR WHAT THE WORLD
MARKETS ARE PREDICTING.
>> THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT
SON I A TIGHTROPE.
WHAT THEY ARE REALLY TRYING
TO DO IS CHANGE THE ECONOMY,
UPGRADE THE ECONOMY, GO
HIGHER VALUE ADDED.
AND THE QUESTION IS CAN THEY
DO IT?
I REALLY HAVE TO GIVE CREDIT
FOR THE GOVERNMENT.
THEY'RE BEING VERY, VERY
BRAVE.
THERE IS A LOT OF ENTRENCHED
INTEREST AGAINST THAT.
REALLY GOING AFTER THE
GROWTH ENGINE OF THE COUNTRY
FOR THE LAST 20 YEARS.
THEY'RE CHANGING THAT NOW.
AN WHETHER THEY CAN SUCCEED
OR NOT WILL MEAN A LOT FOR
NOT ONLY CHINA AND THEIR
PEOPLE BUT THE WORLD
ECONOMY.
>> KEN HOFFMAN, THANKS SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IF YOU HAVEN'T
LOOKED RECENTLY, WE CAN TELL YOU
THAT TWO ADULT COLORING BOOKS,
THAT'S RIGHT, ADULT COLORING
BOOKS, NOW RANK FIRST AND SECOND
ON AMAZON'S LIST OF BEST
SELLERS.
THE CRAZE HAS TAKEN HOLD IN
GREAT BRITAIN AS WELL.
I.T.V.'S DAVID WOOD REPORTS.
>> DESPITE THE FOLIOS, PLAYS
AND LITERARY CLASSICS, IT'S
A COLORING BOOK THAT'S
FLYING OFF THE SHELVES,
SELLING MORE THAN A MILLION
COPIES SECRET GARDEN IS
CAPTURING ADULTS IMAGINATION
AS THEY ADD COLOR TO THESE
PEN DRAWINGS.
AND IT IS A CRAZE THAT HAS
TAKEN BOOK SHOPS BY
SURPRISE.
>> PUBLISHING HAS REALLY
IMPROVED IN CATEGORIES, AS A
RESULT, WE'VE GOT LOADS OF
REALLY GOOD BOOKS TO SELL.
>> THIS ARTIST IS THE WOMAN
WHO IS REINVENTING COLORING
IN.
ENCOURAGED BY HER FRIEND TO
PUBLISH HER BLACK AND WHITE
DRAWINGS, SHE HAS NOW
CREATED A BEST-SELLER.
>> WHEN I STARTED OUT, I
JUST WANTED TO MAKE A BOOK
THAT I WOULD LIKE AND I HOPE
THAT A FEW OTHER PEOPLE
WOULD FEEL THE SAME WAY AND
BUY IT I JUST THINK IT'S A
REALLY LOVELY WAY TO
DESTRESS AND BE CREATIVE.
>> SHE HAS ALREADY RELEASED
A SECRET ON SALE IN AN
INCREASINGLY CROWDED MARKET.
>> SALES OF COLORING BOOKS
ARE CONTINUING TO BOOM
ACROSS THE ARTS AN CRAFT
SECTION, RISING BY 300% IN
THE LAST YEAR.
FOR THIS BEST SEVERAL, THE
SECRET GARDEN SALES ROSE BY
A THOUSAND PERCENT IN THE
LAST YEAR.
WITH WORD SPREADING, SHOPS
ARE SELLING OUT FAST.
CUSTOMERS ALL WITH THEIR OWN
REASON TO DIG OUT THEIR PENS
AND PENCILS.
>> IF I HAVE LITTLE CHILDREN,
I WILL PUT THEM WITH THEIR
COLORING BOOK AND I WILL SIT
DOWN AND COLOR MY BOOK.
>> IT IS RELAXATION,
SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
>> IT IS FUN, YEAH.
>> ANYONE CAN DO THIS, CAN'T
THEY IS THIS.
>> AND THERE ARE PLENTY OF
BOOKS TO PRACTICE ON, WITH
NEW ADULT ARTISTS LOOK TO
PROVE THEY TOO CAN COLOR IN
BETWEEN THE LINES.
DAVID WOOD, ITV NEWS.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU, THE UNITED
STATES IS PROTESTING WHAT IT
CALLS AGGRESSIVE MANEUVERS BY
THE PILOT OF A RUSSIAN FIGHTER
PLANE.
THE PENTAGON SAYS HE CAME
DANGEROUSLY CLOSE TO AN
AMERICAN RECONNAISSANCE PLANE
OVER INTERNATIONAL WATERS.
AND IN KENYA TODAY, ONE
UNIVERSITY STUDENT DIED,
MORE THAN A HUNDRED OTHERS WERE
INJURED AFTER AN ELECTRICAL
EXPLOSION CREATED PANIC.
MANY STUDENTS JUMPED FROM
WINDOWS FEARING THAT A TERROR
ATTACK WAS UNDERWAY.
LAST WEEK MORE THAN 140
KENYAN STUDENTS WERE SHOT DEAD
BY TERRORISTS.
JOINING US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW, I'M HARI SREENIVASAN,
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.